When Preference Applies
Preference in hiring applies to permanent and temporary positions in the competitive and excepted services
of the executive branch. Preference does not apply to positions in the Senior Executive Service or to
executive branch positions for which Senate confirmation is required. The legislative and judicial branches of
the Federal Government also are exempt from the Veterans' Preference Act unless the positions are in the
competitive service (Government Printing Office, for example) or have been made subject to the Act by
another law.
Preference applies in hiring from civil service examinations conducted by the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) and agencies under delegated examining authority, for most excepted service jobs
including Veterans Recruitment Appointments (VRA), and when agencies make temporary, term, and
overseas limited appointments. Veterans' preference does not apply to promotion, reassignment, change to
lower grade, transfer or reinstatement.
Veterans' preference does not require an agency to use any particular appointment process. Agencies have
broad authority under law to hire from any appropriate source of eligibles including special appointing
authorities. An agency may consider candidates already in the civil service from an agency-developed merit
promotion list or it may reassign a current employee, transfer an employee from another agency, or reinstate
a former Federal employee. In addition, agencies are required to give priority to displaced employees before
using civil service examinations and similar hiring methods.
Civil service examination: 5 U.S.C. 3304-3330, 5 CFR Part 332, OPM Delegation Agreements
with individual agencies, OPM Examining Handbook, OPM Delegated Examining Operations
Handbook; Excepted service appointments, including VRA's: 5 U.S.C. 3320; 5 CFR Part 302;
Temporary and term employment: 5 CFR Parts 316 and 333; Overseas limited employment:
5 CFR Part 301; Career Transition Program: 5 CFR Part 330, Subparts F and G.

Types of Preference
To receive preference, a veteran must have been discharged or released from active duty in the Armed Forces
under honorable conditions (i.e., with an honorable or general discharge). As defined in 5 U.S.C. 2101(2),
"Armed Forces" means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps and Coast Guard. The veteran must also be
eligible under one of the preference categories below (also shown on the Standard Form (SF) 50,
Notification of Personnel Action).
Military retirees at the rank of major, lieutenant commander, or higher are not eligible for preference in
appointment unless they are disabled veterans. (This does not apply to Reservists who will not begin drawing
military retired pay until age 60.)
For non-disabled users, active duty for training by National Guard or Reserve soldiers does not qualify as
"active duty" for preference.
For disabled veterans, active duty includes training service in the Reserves or National Guard, per the Merit
Systems Protection Board decision in Hesse v. Department of the Army, 104 M.S.P.R.647(2007).
For purposes of this chapter and 5 U.S.C. 2108, "war" means only those armed conflicts declared by
Congress as war and includes World War II, which covers the period from December 7, 1941, to April 28,
1952.
When applying for Federal jobs, eligible veterans should claim preference on their application or resume.
Applicants claiming 10-point preference must complete Standard Form (SF) 15, Application for 10-Point
Veteran Preference, and submit the requested documentation.
The following preference categories and points are based on 5 U.S.C. 2108 and 3309 as modified by a length
of service requirement in 38 U.S.C. 5303A(d).

Adjudication of Veterans' Preference Claims
Agencies are responsible for adjudicating all preference claims except claims for preference based on
common-law marriage, which should be sent to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Office of the
General Counsel, 1900 E. St. NW, Washington, DC 20415.
5 U.S.C. 3309, 3313 and 5 CFR 332.401, 337.101

Crediting Experience of Preference Eligibles
In evaluating experience, an examining office must credit a preference eligible's Armed Forces service as an
extension of the work performed immediately prior to the service, or on the basis of the actual duties
performed in the service, or as a combination of both, whichever would most benefit the preference eligible.
The examining office must also give all applicants credit for job-related experience, paid and unpaid,
including experience in religious, civic, welfare, service and organizational activities.
5 U.S.C. 3311, 5 CFR 337.101

Physical Qualifications
In determining qualifications, agencies must waive a medical standard or physical requirement when there is
sufficient evidence that the employee or applicant, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform
the essential duties of the position without endangering the health and safety of the individual or others.
Special provisions apply to the proposed disqualification of a preference eligible with a 30 percent or more
compensable disability. See Disqualification of 30 Percent or more Disabled Veterans below. 5 U.S.C.
3312, 5 CFR Part 339.204

Age Qualifications
On July 2, 2008, the Merit Systems Protection Board (Board) issued a final decision in Robert P. Isabella v.
Department of State and Office of Personnel Management, 2008 M.S.P.B. 146, that affects preference
eligibles who apply for federal positions having a maximum entry-age restriction. The Board decided that the
agency's failure to waive the maximum entry-age requirements for Mr. Isabella, a preference eligible veteran,
violated his rights under the Veteran Employment Opportunities Act of 1998 (VEOA) because there was no
demonstration that a maximum entry-age was essential to the performance of the position.
Based on the Board's decision in Isabella, qualified preference eligibles may now apply and be considered for
vacancies regardless of whether they meet the maximum age requirements identified at 5 U.S.C. 3307. In
order to determine whether it must waive a maximum entry-age requirement, an agency must first analyze
the affected position to determine whether age is essential to the performance of the position. If the agency
decides age is not essential to the position, then it must waive the maximum entry-age requirement for
veterans' preference eligible applicants. In instances where the maximum entry-age is waived, the
corresponding mandatory retirement age for these individuals will also be higher because it will be reached
after 20 years of Law Enforcement Officer (LEO) service for the entitlement to an immediate enhanced
annuity.
The same principles set forth above would apply to appointments to other types of positions for which the
setting of maximum entry ages are authorized under 5 U.S.C. ยง 3307. These types of positions are: (1)
firefighters, (2) air traffic controllers, (3) United States Park police, (4) nuclear materials couriers, and (5)
customs and border patrol officers (subject to the Federal Employees Retirement System, 5 U.S.C. ยง 8401 et
seq. only).
